            United Nations                                                                  S/RES/2713 (2023)*
            Security Council                                                  Distr.: General
                                                                              1 December 2023




            Resolution 2713 (2023)
            Adopted by the Security Council at its 9490th meeting, on
            1 December 2023

                 The Security Council,
                  Recalling all its previous resolutions and statements of its President on the
            situation in Somalia,
                 Reaffirming its respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity, political
            independence and unity of Somalia,
                 Commending the progress made in Somalia over the past ten years, and
            especially over the past two years in the fight against Al -Shabaab,
                 Emphasising that the purpose of this resolution is to degrade the threat posed by
            Al-Shabaab,

            Degrading the threat posed by Al-Shabaab, and the Arms Embargo on
            Al-Shabaab
                 Expressing grave concern that Al-Shabaab continues to pose a serious threat to
            the peace, security and stability of Somalia and the region, and further expressing
            concern about the continued presence in Somalia of affiliates linked to ISIL/Da’esh,
                 Condemning in the strongest possible terms Al-Shabaab’s terrorist attacks,
            expressing deep concern at the loss of life from these attacks, further condemning
            Al-Shabaab’s radicalisation to violent ends and exploitation, inc luding financially of
            communities, and reiterating its determination to support comprehensive efforts to
            reduce the threat posed by Al-Shabaab,
                  Strongly condemning the targeting of civilians, including humanitarian
            personnel and any unlawful attacks against civilian objects in situations of conflict,
            as well as the indiscriminate use of explosive weapons, in particular in densely
            populated areas, and the consequences for the civilian population, and calling upon
            all parties to the conflict to cease such practices in accordance with their obligations
            under international law, including international humanitarian law,
                  Recalling the 2023 Report of the Secretary-General on Children and Armed
            Conflict (S/2023/363), and noting with concern the high levels of recruitment of
            children in armed conflict in violation of international law and high levels of
            abductions, with Al-Shabaab responsible for almost all cases of child recruitment and
            abduction of children, and urging the Government of the Federal Republic of Somalia

          * Reissued for technical reasons on 12 December 2023.


23-23995* (E)
*2323995*

S/RES/2713 (2023)

                  (GFRS), and Somalia’s Federal Member States (FMS) and regional governments, 1 to
                  further strengthen efforts to address the “six grave violations” against ch ildren as
                  identified by the Secretary-General, including by implementing measures in line with
                  resolution 2467 (2019),
                        Underscoring the importance of a holistic, whole-of-government and whole-ofsociety approach, including the full participation of women, to counter terrorism and
                  violent extremism conducive to terrorism, conducted in accordance with applicable
                  international law, as well as efforts to address the govern ance, security, human rights,
                  humanitarian, development and socioeconomic dimensions of the problem, including
                  youth employment and eradication of poverty, and emphasising the importance of
                  regional and international cooperation to counter terrorism, disru pt terrorist finances
                  and illicit financial flows, and stop arms trafficking,
                        Reiterating that terrorism cannot, and should not, be associated with any
                  religion, nationality, civilisation or ethnic group, condemning terrorist groups’
                  attempts to craft distorted narratives that are based on misrepresentation of religion
                  to justify violence and to popularise their attempts to undermine Somalia and the
                  region, expressing concern over their exploitation of information and communication
                  technologies including through the Internet, particularly social media, for terrorist
                  purposes, and supporting the GFRS’s renewed efforts to counter Al -Shabaab’s
                  narratives,
                        Strongly encouraging Member States to work with the GFRS to prevent
                  Al-Shabaab from using social media platforms for criminal purposes and to counter
                  terrorist propaganda, and strongly encouraging the GFRS to develop a
                  communication strategy and a publicity and outreach mechanism to systematically
                  counter the narratives of Al-Shabaab through audio-visual and social media in a
                  manner consistent with their obligations under international law,
                        Expressing serious concern about the humanitarian situation in Somalia,
                  encouraging States to scale-up their humanitarian support to Somalia, and calling for
                  all parties to the conflict to allow and facilitate, in accordance with relevant
                  provisions of international law, including applicable international humanitarian law,
                  and in a manner consistent with the United Nations guiding principles of humanitarian
                  emergency assistance (United Nations General Assembly resolution 46/182),
                  including humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence, the rapid and
                  unhindered provision of humanitarian assistance necessary to support persons in need
                  across Somalia,
                        Recognising the contribution of Somali, African Union, and other forces
                  operating legally in Somalia towards combatting Al-Shabaab, often at great sacrifice,
                  and liberating areas of central Somalia from control by the group, and welcoming
                  Somali and international efforts to bring stabilisation support and services to newly
                  liberated communities,
                        Urging continued development of a Somalia-led, coordinated approach in
                  developing Somalia’s maritime governance sector, including through the formation
                  of the Maritime Security Working Group, and support of Somalia’s maritime
                  institutions,
                        Noting with concern smuggling and trafficking of weapons, military equipment
                  and ammunition in contravention of the measures imposed by the Security Council in
                  this and previous resolutions, and urging the GFRS, FMS and Member States to take
                  appropriate measures to identify smugglers and hold them accountable,
         __________________
              1
                  For the purposes of this resolution Somalia’s Federal Member States and regional governments
                  are: Galmudug, Hirshabelle, Jubaland, Puntland, South West, and Banadir and “Somaliland”.

2/14                                                                                                             23-23995

                                                                                                      S/RES/2713 (2023)

                       Expressing concern about the violation of the charcoal ban by the vessel MV
                Fox documented by the Panel of Experts on Somalia (Panel), commending the Panel’s
                investigations into this incident, urging all parties to engage constructively with the
                Panel and the GFRS on this matter, and reminding all Member States of the provisions
                in its Implementation Assistance Notice No.1,
                      Emphasising that its objective, through this resolution, is to continue to update
                its consolidated framework – drawing on the technical assessments of Somalia’s
                weapons and ammunition management capability (S/2022/698 and S/2023/676), and
                taking note of the final report of the Panel (S/2023/724) and recommendations from
                the United Nations Office on Drugs Crime (UNODC) – to strengthen state- and peacebuilding, defeat Al-Shabaab and complement the mandates of the United Nations
                Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), the United Nations Support Office in
                Somalia (UNSOS) and the African Union Transition Mission in Somalia (ATMIS),
                      Recognising that Al-Shabaab poses a threat to peace and security in Somalia,
                and that its terrorist and other activities pose a security threat to the region, and
                underscoring the need to degrade Al-Shabaab through: targeted sanctions, preventing
                access to weapons and ammunition, disrupting its finances, reducing the threat posed
                by improvised explosive devices, improving maritime domain awareness and through
                international collaboration,
                      Recognising the need to continuously strengthen due process and to ensure that
                fair and clear procedures exist for delisting individuals and entities designated
                pursuant to resolution 1844 (2008) as amended,
                      Determining that Al-Shabaab’s attempts to undermine peace and security in
                Somalia and the region, including through acts of terrorism, constitute a threat to
                international peace and security,
                     Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
                                                          *


           A.   Targeted sanctions

                      1.   Recalls its decisions in its resolution 1844 (2008), which imposed targeted
                sanctions, and its resolutions 2002 (2011), 2093 (2013) and 2662 (2022), which
                expanded the listing criteria, and recalls its decisions in resolutions 2060 (2012) and
                2444 (2018);
                      2.   Expresses its intention to support the further development of fair and clear
                procedures for the delisting of individuals and entities designated pursuant to
                resolution 1844 (2008) as amended;
                     3.   Recalls resolution 2664 (2022), which established a cross-cutting
                humanitarian exemption to asset freeze measures, including those imposed by
                paragraph 3 of resolution 1844 (2008), supersedes and replaces the humanitarian
                exemption relating to Somalia in paragraph 28 of resolution 2662 (2022);


           B.   Arms embargo on Al-Shabaab

                     4.    Decides that all States shall, for the purposes of preventing Al-Shabaab
                and other actors intent on undermining peace and security in Somalia and th e region
                from obtaining weapons and ammunition, take the necessary measures to prevent all
                deliveries of weapons, ammunition and military equipment to Somalia, including
                prohibiting the financing of all acquisitions and deliveries of weapons, ammunition


23-23995                                                                                                           3/14

S/RES/2713 (2023)

               and military equipment, and further decides that these measures shall not apply to
               deliveries or supplies to the GFRS, the Somali National Army (SNA), the National
               Intelligence and Security Agency (NISA), the Somali National Police Force (SNPF)
               and the Somali Custodial Corps;
                    5.    Takes note of the recent military operations against Al-Shabaab and
               encourages the GFRS and Somalia’s FMS and regional governments, with the support
               of partners as appropriate, to register all weapons, ammunition and military
               equipment captured or seized from Al-Shabaab and, with the assistance of the Panel
               as necessary, to investigate their origin;
                     6.     Affirms that the GFRS, in cooperation with ATMIS, shall document and
               register all weapons, ammunition and military equipment, capture d from Al-Shabaab
               as part of offensive operations, or in the course of carrying out their mandate,
               including:
                  a.    recording the type, lot/batch and serial number of the weapon and/or
               ammunition;
                    b.    photographing all items and relevant markings and/or head stamps;
                    c.    facilitating inspection by the Panel of all captured weapons, ammunition
               and military items before their redistribution or destruction;
                   7.    Calls on Member States to take reasonable steps to prevent smuggling of
               weapons and ammunition into Somalia;


         C.    Disrupting Al-Shabaab’s finances

                     8.   Notes with concern Al-Shabaab’s ability to generate revenue and launder,
               store and transfer resources to carry out terrorism and destabilise Somalia and the
               region, and requests the GFRS, working with international partners as appropriate, to
               continue to develop a comprehensive plan to disrupt Al-Shabaab’s operations;
                    9.     Calls upon the GFRS to continue working with the FMS, Somali financial
               authorities, private sector financial institutions and the international community to:
                    a.    identify, assess and mitigate money laundering and terrorist financing risks
               by improving anti-money laundering and countering the financing of terrorism
               standards, legal, regulatory and institutional frameworks;
                     b.   improve compliance, including Know Your Customer and customer due
               diligence procedures;
                     c.    strengthen supervision and enforcement, in line with the Anti-Money
               Laundering and Countering the Financing of Terrorism Act ( 2016), as well as the
               Mobile Money Regulations (2019) and relevant Financial Action Task Force
               recommendations, and encourages collaboration with the telecoms sector to reduce
               the risk of exploitation of the mobile money sector by Al-Shabaab;
                   d.    use Somalia’s Middle East and North Africa Financial Action Task Force
               Mutual Evaluation in 2024 to address priority areas relating to terrorist financing and
               money laundering risks;
                     e.    prioritise the continued development of a secure and inclusive, national
               identification system that improves financial access while countering the financing of
               terrorism;
                     f.    improve monitoring, reporting and investigations into money laundering
               and terrorist financing as required under the Anti-Money Laundering and Countering
               the Financing of Terrorism Act (2016); and,

4/14                                                                                                     23-23995

                                                                                                     S/RES/2713 (2023)

                     g.    develop a plan to mitigate the risks posed by Al-Shabaab to personnel
                working in anti-money laundering and counter terrorist financing roles within
                national competent authorities and the private sector, and a plan to protect those who
                share information relating to Al-Shabaab’s extortion tactics;
                     10. Calls upon the GFRS to improve collaboration and coordination among
                regulatory and law enforcement agencies and undertake coordinated and joint
                approaches to terrorist finance investigations and implement disruption strategies to
                counter-Al-Shabaab’s finances and its exploitation of the licit financial system;
                     11. Requests the GFRS, UNODC and the Panel to continue exchanging
                information about Al-Shabaab’s operations and to continue working with stakeholders
                to develop a plan to disrupt Al-Shabaab’s operations and exploitation of the licit
                financial system;
                       12. Notes UNODC’s coordination role in finalising and implementing the draft
                Roadmap for Enhanced Inter-Agency Cooperation to Combat Illicit Trade and its
                Effects, and encourages Somalia to work with UNODC to develop a plan to disrupt
                all illicit trade from which Al-Shabaab profits;
                      13. Welcomes regional and international cooperation to degrade the threat
                posed by Al-Shabaab, and encourages continued cooperation at the regional and
                international level to address the threat posed by Al-Shabaab to Somalia and the
                region, and encourages international cooperation with the United Nations Office of
                Counter-Terrorism Programme Office in Nairobi in its support for regional countries
                in their efforts to counter terrorism and violent extremism conducive to terrorism;


           D.   Charcoal Ban

                      14. Reaffirms its decision to ban the import and export of Somali charcoal, as
                set out in paragraph 22 of its resolution 2036 (2012), and paragraphs 11 to 21 of
                resolution 2182 (2014);
                      15. Welcomes measures taken by the GFRS, FMS and Member States to reduce
                the export of charcoal from Somalia, reiterates its requests that ATMIS support and
                assist Somalia in implementing the charcoal ban, and facilitate regular access for the
                Panel to charcoal exporting ports, and reaffirms the importance of the efforts of the
                UNODC and its international partners to monitor and disrupt the export and import
                of charcoal to and from Somalia;
                      16. Recalls paragraph 36 of resolution 2662 (2022), and welcomes the
                collaborative development of a plan to dispose of the charcoal stockpile s in and
                around Kismayo and encourages Somalia to continue to ensure the sustainable
                management of domestic charcoal production, with support from other partners, as
                appropriate;
                     17. Recalls its decision in resolution 2696 (2023) to authorise a one-off
                disposal of charcoal stockpiles in and around Kismayo, and requests:
                      a.   the Panel and UNODC to continue to monitor the charcoal stockpiles and
                their movement to ensure the complete disposal does not trigger illicit production of
                charcoal; and,
                      b.   the GFRS to continue to engage with the Committee throughout the
                disposal process, including sharing a final record of funds ge nerated upon completion
                of the disposal process;




23-23995                                                                                                          5/14

S/RES/2713 (2023)

         E.    Reducing the threat posed by Improvised Explosive Devices (IEDs)

                      18. Reaffirms that all States shall prevent the direct or indirect sale, supply or
               transfer of the items in part I of Annex C to this resolution to Somalia from their
               territories or by their nationals outside their territories, or using their flag vessels or
               aircraft if there is sufficient evidence to demonstrate that the item(s) will be used, or
               a significant risk they may be used, in the manufacture in Somalia of improvised
               explosive devices;
                    19.    Decides that:
                    a.   prior to transferring any items in Part 1 of Annex C to Somalia, the
               supplying Member State of the items should notify the GFRS for its awareness;
                     b.   where an item in part I of Annex C to this resolution is directly or indirectly
               sold, supplied or transferred to Somalia consistent with paragraph 19, the State shall
               notify the GFRS for its awareness and the Committee of the sale, supply or transfer
               no more than 15 working days after the sale, supply or transfer takes place, and
               stresses the importance that notifications pursuant to this paragraph contain all
               relevant information, including:
                    i.     purpose of the use of the item(s);
                    ii.    end user;
                    iii.   technical specifications;
                    iv.    quantity of the item(s); and
                    v.     intended storage location;
                    20. Encourages the GFRS to implement appropriate legislation to regulate and
               monitor the import and transit of items listed in parts I and II of Annex C, and calls
               upon Member States to support the GFRS in this objective;
                     21. Calls upon Member States to undertake appropriate measures to promote
               the exercise of vigilance by their nationals, persons subject to their jurisdiction and
               firms incorporated in their territory or subject to their j urisdiction that are involved
               in the sale, supply, or transfer of explosive precursors and materials to Somalia that
               may be used in the manufacture of improvised explosive devices, including, among
               other things, items in part II of Annex C, to keep records of transactions and share
               information with Somalia, the Committee and the Panel regarding suspicious
               purchases of or enquiries into these chemicals by individuals in Somalia and to ensure
               that Somalia is provided with adequate financial and technical assi stance to establish
               appropriate safeguards for the storage and distribution of materials;
                    22. Encourages international and regional partners of Somalia to implement
               continued specialist training of Explosive Ordnance Disposal teams and to provide
               appropriate equipment and coordinate support to reinforce Somali capacity in the
               analysis of explosives and tracing the origin and chain of custody of IEDs and their
               components;


          F.   Maritime interdiction and maritime domain awareness

                     23. Decides to renew the provisions set out in paragraphs 15 and 17 of
               resolution 2182 (2014), and expanded by paragraph 5 of resolution 2607 (2021) to
               cover IED components, until 15 December 2024;
                   24. Encourages the UNODC, within its current mandate, under the Indian
               Ocean Forum on Maritime Crime, to support the GFRS to counter Al-Shabaab by:

6/14                                                                                                         23-23995

                                                                                                         S/RES/2713 (2023)

                      a.   bringing together relevant Member States and international organisations
                to enhance regional cooperation on responding to illicit maritime flows and disrupt
                all forms of trafficking in licit and illicit goods that may finance terrorist activities;
                       b.    supporting Somalia to improve their maritime domain awareness and
                enforcement, including in relation to the role of fishing vessels in trafficking and
                illicit trade;
                     c.    supporting the GFRS with fisheries protection and its enforcement
                capability demonstrator project;
                     d.   supporting the GFRS by extending capacity building on law enforcement
                and counter-smuggling at ports; and,
                      e.    engaging with shipping association representatives to discuss possible
                ways to make these measures more implementable and propose recommendations in
                its next briefing to the Committee in 2024;


           G.   Panel of Experts and Security Council Committee

                      25. Decides to renew, with effect from the date of adoption of this resolution,
                until 15 January 2025, the Panel, to henceforth be known as the Panel of Experts
                pursuant to resolution 2713 (2023), and that their mandate shall include the tasks
                referred to in paragraph 11 of resolution 2444 (2018), paragraphs 5, 11 and 17 to this
                resolution, requests the Secretary-General to include dedicated gender expertise, in
                line with paragraph 11 of its resolution 2467 (2019) and further requests the Panel to
                include gender as a cross-cutting issue in its investigations and reporting, and
                expresses its intention to review this mandate and take appropriate action regarding
                any extension and modification of this mandate, no later than 15 December 2024;
                      26. Recalls the importance of full co-operation between Member States and
                the Panel, requests the GFRS to facilitate for the Panel interviews of suspected
                members of Al-Shabaab and other persons of interest held in custody, notes the
                importance of the Panel carrying out their mandate in line with document S/2006/997,
                and requests the Panel to give recommendations to the Committee on how to support
                the GFRS in weapons and ammunition management and reduce smuggling of
                weapons and ammunition, including efforts towards establishing a National Small
                Arms and Light Weapons Commission and address sexual violence in conflict and the
                “six grave violations” against children, in line with S/2023/676;
                      27. Reiterates its request for the GFRS, Somalia’s FMS and regional
                governments, Member States, and ATMIS to provide information to the Panel, and
                assist them in their investigations; and,
                     a.   requests the GFRS to facilitate, on the basis of written requests to the
                GFRS by the Panel, access for the Panel to armouries, imported weapons and
                ammunition, military storage facilities in SNA sectors and captured weaponry in
                Somali custody, and to allow photographs of weapons and ammunition in Somali
                custody and access to logbooks and distribution records;
                    b.   encourages the Panel to coordinate closely with the Central Monitoring
                Department (CMD) on 27.a;
                      c.     urges the GFRS, FMS, ATMIS and partners to share information with the
                Panel regarding conduct or activities, in particular on illicit flows of finances,
                weapons, ammunition and military equipment by Al-Shabaab and other actors intent
                on undermining peace and security in Somalia and the region, where covered by
                listing criteria for targeted sanctions;


23-23995                                                                                                              7/14

S/RES/2713 (2023)

                     28. Requests the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
               and Armed Conflict and the Special Representative for Sexual Violence in Confli ct
               to share relevant information with the GFRS and the Committee in accordance with
               paragraph 7 of resolution 1960 (2010) and paragraph 9 of resolution 1998 (2011), and
               invites the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
               share relevant information with the GFRS and the Committee, as appropriate;
                    29.   Requests the Panel to provide:
                    a.    regular updates to the Committee, in collaboration with independent
               experts appointed to help the work of other sanctions committees if appropriate,
               including a minimum of three different thematic reports;
                    b.    a comprehensive mid-term update; and
                    c.    for the Security Council’s consideration through the Committee a final
               report by 15 October 2024;
               and urges the Panel to seek feedback from the Committee on the findings of their
               reporting;
                     30. Requests the Emergency Relief Coordinator to provide an update on the
               delivery of humanitarian assistance in Somalia and any impediments to its delivery
               by 15 October 2024; and from UNODC, an update on its work related to this
               resolution by 15 October 2024;
                     31. Decides that future briefings from the Chair of the Committee to the
               Security Council shall take place on an annual basis to align with the latest scheduled
               Somalia meeting before 15 December 2024 and further decides that henceforth the
               Committee shall cease being described as “pursuant to resolution 751 (1992)” and
               instead be described as “pursuant to resolution 2713 (2023)”;


         H.    Preventing Al-Shabaab from accessing weapons, ammunition and
               military equipment

                     32. Encourages the GFRS to share with the Committee a list of licenced
               private security companies operating in Somalia that shall be allowed to import
               weapons, ammunition and military equipment required for static and mobile
               protection;
                  33. Affirms that paragraph 4 does not apply to supplies of weapons,
               ammunition or military equipment intended solely for the support of, or use by:
                    a.    GFRS;
                    b.    SNA;
                    c.    NISA;
                    d.    SNPF; and,
                    e.    the Somali Custodial Corps;
                  34. Decides that paragraph 4 shall not apply to supplies of weapons,
               ammunition or military equipment intended solely for the support of, or use by:
                    a.    United Nations personnel, including UNSOM and UNSOS;
                     b.   ATMIS and its Troop- and Police-Contributing Countries, as well as its
               strategic partners who are operating solely under the latest African Union Strategic
               Concept of Operations and in cooperation and coordination with ATMIS; and,



8/14                                                                                                     23-23995

                                                                                                   S/RES/2713 (2023)

                c.   European Union training and support activities, Türkiye, the United
           Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America, as
           well as any other Member State forces, with a status of forces agreement or a
           memorandum of understanding with the GFRS, provided that they inform the
           Committee, for information purposes only, about the existence of such agreements;
              35. Decides that paragraph 4 shall not apply to supplies of weapons,
           ammunition or military equipment intended solely for the support of, or use by:
                a.    Somalia’s FMS and regional governments; or
                b.    licenced private security companies operating in Somalia;
           except in relation to items in Annexes A and B to this resolution, which are subject to
           the procedures as set out in paragraphs 36 and 37 to this resolution;
                36. Decides that deliveries of items in Annex A to this resolution to FMS and
           regional governments, or to licenced private security companies operating in Somalia,
           to provide security for international and commercial premises and personnel in
           Somalia, may be provided in the absence of a negative decision by the Committee
           within five working days of receiving a notification from the GFRS;
                 37. Decides that deliveries of items in Annex B to this resolution to FMS and
           regional governments, or to licenced private security companies operating in Somalia,
           to provide security for international and commercial premises and personnel in
           Somalia, are subject to notification to the Committee, for information only, at least
           five working days in advance by the GFRS;
                38.   Decides that all notifications should include:
                 a.   details of the manufacturer and supplier of the weapons, ammunition and
           military equipment, including type, lot/batch and serial numbers;
                b.   a description of the arms and ammunition including the type, calibre and
           quantity;
                c.    proposed date and place of delivery; and
                d.    all relevant information concerning the intended destination unit, or the
           intended place of storage;
                 39. Decides that where paragraphs 36 or 37 apply, the GFRS shall, no later
           than 30 days after the delivery of weapons, ammunition and military equipment,
           submit to the Committee a post-delivery notification, for information only, in the form
           of written confirmation of the completion of any delivery, including: type, quantities,
           lot/batch and serial numbers for the weapons and military equipment delivered,
           shipping information, bill of lading, cargo manifests or packing lists, intended end -
           user and the specific place of storage;
                40. Affirms that the GFRS has the primary responsibility to notify the
           Committee pursuant to paragraphs 36 and 37, of any deliveries of weapons,
           ammunition and military equipment to Somalia and stresses that all prospective
           suppliers of weapons and ammunition to Somalia should consult with the GFRS;
                 41. Affirms that to further avoid Al-Shabaab obtaining weapons and
           ammunition, weapons, ammunition and military equipment sold or supplied in
           accordance with paragraphs 33, 34, and 35 of this resolution shall not be resold to,
           transferred to, or made available for use by any individual or entity not in the service
           of the recipient to which it was originally sold or supplied, or the selling or supplying
           State or international, regional or sub-regional organisation and requests the
           Committee to share all notifications pertaining to paragraphs 36, 37 and 39 submitted


23-23995                                                                                                        9/14

S/RES/2713 (2023)

               to the Committee with the appropriate national coordinating body in Somalia, the
               Office of National Security, for their information;
                     42. Requests the Secretariat to support the GFRS’ dissemination efforts in
               relation to the control of arms, ammunition and related materiel in the local language,
               if necessary, within its existing resources;
                     43. Affirms its commitment to working with Somalia to ensure that the
               procedures set out in this resolution and Annexes A and B continue to be lifted
               progressively, and that it shall keep the situation under constant review and be
               prepared to review the appropriateness of the measures contained in this resolution,
               including any modification, suspension or lifting of the measures, as may be needed,
               in light of the progress achieved and compliance with this resolution;
                    44.   Decides that paragraph 4 shall not apply to:
                    a.    supplies of protective clothing, including flak jackets and military helmets,
               temporarily exported to Somalia by United Nations personnel, repr esentatives of the
               media, private security contractors and humanitarian and development workers and
               associated personnel for their personal use only;
                     b.   the delivery of non-lethal military equipment by States, or international,
               regional or sub-regional organisations intended solely for humanitarian or protective
               use; and
                    c.    entry into Somali ports for temporary visits of vessels carrying weapons
               and military equipment for defensive purposes provided that such items remain at all
               times aboard such vessels;


          I.   Reporting

                    45.   Requests the following reports to the Security Council:
                    a.    from the GFRS, in coordination and collaboration with Somalia’s FMS
               and regional governments as appropriate, including thorough the structures of the
               National Security Architecture, and in accordance with paragraph 9 of resolution 2182
               (2014) and as requested in paragraph 7 of resolution 2244 (2015), by 1 May 2024 and
               then by 1 October 2024, reports which includes:
                    i.    a description of Somalia’s security and police institutions, and the status
                    of regional and militia forces, as well as the infrastructu re in place to ensure the
                    safe storage, registration, maintenance and distribution of weapons, ammunition
                    and military equipment, and any capacity building requirements in this regard;
                    ii.   a description of the procedures and codes of conduct in place for the
                    registration, distribution, use and storage of weapons, and any capacity building
                    requirements in this regard;
                    iii. a consolidated list of the weapons, ammunition and military equipment
                    imported in the reporting period, including: the manufacturer, ty pe, calibre, and
                    lot/batch and serial numbers;
                    iv. the reports of the Joint Verification Team (JVT) requested in paragraph 7
                    of resolution 2182 (2014) and paragraph 37 of resolution 2551 (2020);
                    v.   an update summarising suspicious activity documented by domestic
                    financial institutions, and investigations and actions undertaken by the Financial
                    Reporting Centre to counter the financing of terrorism and in a manner so as to
                    protect the confidentiality of sensitive information; and,



10/14                                                                                                       23-23995

                                                                                                 S/RES/2713 (2023)

                vi. an update on specific actions taken by Somali Government authorities to
                counter the financing of terrorism;
                b.    from the Secretary-General:
                i.   an update on progress against each indicator set out in the benchmarks
                contained with the technical assessment report (S/2022/698) by 15 October
                2024, and requests that this assessment is:
                      1.   extended to all regions of Somalia where practicable, with specific
                      recommendations and benchmarks as appropriate; and,
                      2.  elaborates an additional benchmark on the safe management of
                      chemical precursors associated with IED manufacture and disposal;
                c.   from organisations and states listed in paragraph 34.c of this resolution, or
           subsequently added, by 15 November 2024, an update on the support provided to
           Somalia since the adoption of this resolution and a consolidated list of the weapons,
           ammunition and military equipment imported in the reporting period, including: the
           manufacturer, type, calibre, and lot/batch and serial numbers;
                 46. Encourages the Counterterrorism Committee Executive Directorate
           (CTED), including with initiatives such as “Tech Against Terrorism” to support the
           GFRS with analysis and reporting on the use of online platforms for terrorist purposes
           by Al-Shabaab, and work in collaboration with Member States in the region to
           facilitate capacity building in detecting and disrupting Al-Shabaab’s terrorist
           activities;
                47.   Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.




23-23995                                                                                                     11/14

S/RES/2713 (2023)

               Annex A – Items subject to a no-objection process *

               1. Surface to air missiles, including Man-Portable Air-Defence Systems
               (MANPADS);
               2.   Weapons with a calibre greater than 12.7 mm, and components specially
               designed for these, and associated ammunition;
                    a.    Note: (This does not include shoulder fired anti-tank rocket launchers such
               as RPGs or LAWs (light anti-tank weapon), recoilless rifles, rifle grenades, or grenade
               launchers.);
               3.    Mortars with a calibre greater than 82 mm and associated ammunition;
               4. Anti-tank guided weapons, including Anti-tank Guided Missiles (ATGMs) and
               ammunition and components specially designed for these items;
               5.   Charges and devices specifically designed or modified for military use; mines
               and related materiel; and fuses;
               6.   Weapon sights with a night vision capability, including thermal and infrared,
               and accessories;
               7.   Fixed wing, swivel wing, tilt rotor or tilt wing aircraft, specifically designed or
               modified for military use;
               8.   ‘Vessels’ and amphibious vehicles specifically designed or modified for military
               use;
                    a.   Note: ‘Vessel’ includes any ship, surface effect vehicle, vessel of small
               waterplane area or hydrofoil and the hull or part of the hull of a vessel;
               9.  Uncrewed combat aerial vehicles (listed as Category IV in the UN Register of
               Conventional Arms).




             * (Not applicable to the Government of the Federal Republic of Somalia, the Somali National Army,
               the Somali National Intelligence and Security Agency, the Somali National Police Force and the
               Somali Custodial Corps).

12/14                                                                                                            23-23995

                                                                                                           S/RES/2713 (2023)

             Annex B – items requiring advance notification (for
             information only)*

             1.    All types of weapons with a calibre up to 12.7mm and associated ammunition;
             2. RPG-7, LAWs (light anti-tank weapons) and recoilless rifles, and associated
             ammunition;
             3.    Weapon sights;
             4.    Rotor wing or helicopters specifically designed or modified for military use;
             5.    Body armour or protective garments, as follows:
                   a.    Hard body armour plates providing ballistic protection equal to or greater
             than level III (NIJ 0101.06 July 2008) or national equivalents;
             6.    Ground vehicles specifically designed or modified for military use;
             7.    Communication equipment specifically designed or modified for military use.




           * (Not applicable to the Government of the Federal Republic of Somalia, the Somali National Army,
             the Somali National Intelligence and Security Agency, the Somali National Police Force and the
             Somali Custodial Corps).

23-23995                                                                                                               13/14

S/RES/2713 (2023)

               Annex C – Improvised Explosive Devices (IED) Components

               Explosive materials, explosives precursors, explosive-related
               equipment, and related technology

               Part I*

               1.   Explosive materials and precursors, as follows, and mixtures containing one or
               more thereof:
                     a.    Nitrocellulose (containing more than 12.5% nitrogen w/w);
                     b.    Trinitrophenylmethylnitramine (tetryl);
                     c.    Nitroglycerin (except when packaged/prepared in individual medicinal
                           doses);
                     d.    Nitric acid;
                     e.    Sulphuric acid;
               2.    Explosive-related goods:
                     a.    Equipment and devices specially designed to initiate explosives by
               electrical or non-electrical means (e.g. firing sets, detonators, igniters, detonating
               chord);
                     b.   “Technology” required for the “production” or “use” of the items listed
               at paragraphs 1 and 2.a;


               Part II

               1.    Explosive materials, as follows, and mixtures containing one or more thereof:
                     a.    Ammonium Nitrate Fuel Oil (ANFO);
                     b.    Nitroglycol;
                     c.    Pentaerythritol tetranitrate (PETN);
                     d.    Picryl chloride;
                     e.    2,4,6-Trinitrotoluene (TNT);
               2.    Explosives precursors:
                     a.    Ammonium nitrate;
                     b.    Potassium nitrate;
                     c.    Sodium chlorate;
               3.    Dual use items identified by the Panel:
                     a.    Alarm systems with disturbance sensors, including motorcycle alarms;
                     b.    Learning code receivers.




             * To be notified to Government of the Federal Republic of Somalia in advance of intended
               shipment.

14/14                                                                                                   23-23995

